=head1 NAME

mod_proxy_msrpc - Apache module for Outlook Anywhere and RDS Gateway support in reverse proxy setups

=head1 SYNOPSIS

Use the verified Sophos XGS lab module:

    module/mod_proxy_msrpc.so

Install and validate it with:

    docs/mod_proxy_msrpc_xgs_install.md

Build the module:

    ./configure
    make

Load the module:

    LoadModule proxy_msrpc_module /path/to/your/mod_proxy_msrpc.so

Enable the module inside a <VirtualHost> configuration container (or globally):

    OutlookAnywherePassthrough On

=head1 CURRENT SOPHOS XGS RDGHTTP LAB BUILD

This repository includes the latest lab-verified source, documentation, and
prebuilt Apache module for Sophos XGS/SFOS testing.

=over 4

=item * Source:

    src/mod_proxy_msrpc.c

=item * Prebuilt tested module:

    module/mod_proxy_msrpc.so

=item * XGS install and validation guide:

    docs/mod_proxy_msrpc_xgs_install.md

=back

The included module was built for the tested Sophos XGS/SFOS Apache target and
has MD5:

    0d33bea4d30d0eea5de5c064c8ae3ae7

The final lab verification kept the original RPC-HTTP path working and added
classic RDGHTTP handling for forced HTTP/extended-auth clients.

Verified behavior:

=over 4

=item * C<RPC_IN_DATA> / C<RPC_OUT_DATA>

Existing MSRPC/RPC-HTTP handling remains the compatibility path.

=item * C<RDG_OUT_DATA> / C<RDG_IN_DATA>

Forwarded as RD Gateway HTTP tunnel traffic without parsing the payload as RPC
PDUs.

=item * C<RDG-Auth-Scheme: SSPI_NTLM>

The module suppresses the outer C<Authorization> header toward the backend and
lets RD Gateway handle extended authentication.

=item * WebSocket-capable RDGHTTP clients

The module downgrades upstream WebSocket upgrade attempts to classic RDGHTTP by
removing C<Upgrade> and C<Sec-WebSocket-*> headers and forwarding
C<Connection: Keep-Alive>.

=back

The WebSocket downgrade is intentional. This module does not implement a
bidirectional WebSocket frame tunnel; forwarding a backend C<101 Switching
Protocols> response without full upgraded-transport handling is not sufficient.

Default MSTSC/default FreeRDP HTTP may still choose Negotiate rather than RDG
extended C<SSPI_NTLM>. The verified HTTP path is forced RDGHTTP/HTTP with
extended SSPI_NTLM authentication. See the XGS install guide for the exact
validation notes and known caveats.

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This module intends to make Apache httpd work in a reverse proxy setup
in front of a MS Exchange server offering Outlook Anywhere services,
or in front of a Microsoft RDS Gateway (Remote Desktop Gateway).
Without it, Apache would block any Outlook Anywhere requests for reasons
documented very well in https://issues.apache.org/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=40029.

Outlook and Exchange use an extended version of DCE RPC called I<MSRPC> to
communicate with each other.
When I<Outlook Anywhere> is in use, the MSRPC messages are wrapped into HTTP
alike requests and responses.
The mod_proxy_msrpc module detects these MSRPC messages and forwards them to
the server or client as needed.
As soon as the initial handshake completed, i.e. Exchange accepted the
connecting client, the mod_proxy_msrpc module switches into tunnel mode and
forwards all data from client to server and vice versa.

=head1 SUPPORTED HTTP METHOD VERBS

The module handles the following non-standard HTTP method verbs:

=over 4

=item B<RPC_IN_DATA>

Client-to-server data channel for Outlook Anywhere (MS-RPCH / RPC over HTTP).

=item B<RPC_OUT_DATA>

Server-to-client data channel for Outlook Anywhere (MS-RPCH / RPC over HTTP).

=item B<RDG_IN_DATA>

Client-to-server data channel for Microsoft RDS Gateway (MS-TSGU, Windows Server 2012+).
Note the counterintuitive naming per the MS-TSGU specification: RDG_IN_DATA carries
data flowing IN to the gateway from the client.

=item B<RDG_OUT_DATA>

Server-to-client data channel for Microsoft RDS Gateway (MS-TSGU, Windows Server 2012+).
RDG_OUT_DATA carries data flowing OUT from the gateway to the client.

=back

=head1 MICROSOFT RDS GATEWAY SUPPORT

Since version 1.x this module supports Microsoft RDS Gateway (Remote Desktop Gateway)
in addition to the original Outlook Anywhere / RPC over HTTP support.

RDS Gateway uses the MS-TSGU protocol specification and is used to broker Remote
Desktop Protocol (RDP) connections through HTTPS.
The gateway client establishes two HTTP channels using the non-standard verbs
B<RDG_OUT_DATA> (server-to-client) and B<RDG_IN_DATA> (client-to-server), which
map directly to the dual-channel model used by Outlook Anywhere
(B<RPC_OUT_DATA> and B<RPC_IN_DATA> respectively).

This feature enables Apache-based WAF/reverse proxy deployments (such as Sophos UTM
and SFOS Web Application Firewall) to proxy RDS Gateway sessions from Windows Server
2012 and later.

References:

=over 4

=item * MS-TSGU specification: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/openspecs/windows_protocols/ms-tsgu

=item * RDG_IN_DATA: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/openspecs/windows_protocols/ms-tsgu/87004f61-03c6-4f3b-b230-5b5b2c0ef820

=item * RDG_OUT_DATA: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/openspecs/windows_protocols/ms-tsgu/6ea45086-c98d-4d5a-ac8c-fb0decc5d2c1

=back

B<User-Agent:> RDS Gateway clients send C<User-Agent: MS-RDGateway/1.0>.
The module accepts this by default — no additional configuration is required.
If you use the C<OutlookAnywhereUserAgents> directive to restrict accepted
User-Agents, add C<MS-RDGateway/1.0> to the list alongside C<MSRPC>.

For the current Sophos XGS lab build, C<RDG_IN_DATA> and C<RDG_OUT_DATA> are not
treated as RPC PDUs. They use a separate RDGHTTP forwarding path that preserves
the original RPC implementation for Outlook Anywhere and RPC-HTTP clients.

=head1 USING OR BUILDING FROM A FRESH CLONE

The repository is intended to be useful in two ways:

=over 4

=item * Use the included lab-tested module for Sophos XGS/SFOS validation.

=item * Build from source for your own Apache reverse proxy environment.

=back

A normal source build uses the classic autotools flow:

    ./configure
    make

The build host needs Apache httpd/APR development headers and the matching APXS
toolchain for the Apache version that will load the module. The module ABI,
Apache module magic number, APR/APR-util versions, and platform libraries matter,
so anyone using it outside the provided Sophos XGS lab artifact should build it
inside their own target-compatible development environment.

The included prebuilt module is provided so another tester can clone the
repository, inspect the exact source and documentation, and install the verified
Sophos XGS/SFOS test artifact. Sophos or any other Apache reverse proxy vendor
should build from source in their own matching development environment.

=head1 CAVEATS

Some older Exchange versions (e.g. Exchange Server 2007) are known to sync
offline address books and calendar information via other protocols than Outlook
Anywhere (i.e. MSRPC via HTTP).
For these Exchange versions functionality of this module is limited to
enabling receiving and sending mail.
I.e. Address book and calendar synchronization doesn't work with these Exchange
versions.


=head1 KNOWN ISSUES FIXED

=over 4

=item * B<RDG_IN_DATA / RDG_OUT_DATA not registered (fixed 19 April 2026)>

The module originally registered only C<RPC_IN_DATA> and C<RPC_OUT_DATA>.
The C<RDG_IN_DATA> and C<RDG_OUT_DATA> verbs used by Microsoft RDS Gateway
(MS-TSGU, Windows Server 2012+) were never registered via C<ap_method_register()>.
This caused Apache to decline all RDS Gateway requests with the log message:
C<declining due to bad method: RDG_OUT_DATA>.
The defect was present since XG V14
Reported by Arno van der Veen / itssecured.nl (Sophos case 03152113).
Sophos did decide not to fix this issue.

=back

=head1 DIAGNOSTICS

If you encounter any problems, you can set following directive:

    LogLevel info proxy_msrpc:trace2

This will enable detailed debug logging for the proxy_msrpc module, which will
be written to the usual Apache log destinations (e.g. to file error.log).

=head1 BUGS

Please use the GitHub issue tracker to check for any pending issues or to report any new bugs.

https://github.com/bombadil/mod_proxy_msrpc/issues

=head1 HISTORY

This module was initially written by Micha Lenk as employee of
Astaro GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, to facilitate Outlook Anywhere
passthrough for the Sophos UTM's Web Application Firewall.
It was first released as part of UTM 9.1 in May 2013.
Sophos generously agreed to contribute the source code to the open source
community under the terms of the Apache License 2.0.

Support for Microsoft RDS Gateway (MS-TSGU) via C<RDG_IN_DATA> and
C<RDG_OUT_DATA> was added in April 2026 following a defect report by
Arno van der Veen / itssecured.nl (Sophos support case 03152113).

The Sophos XGS RDGHTTP lab build was updated in June 2026 to handle RDGHTTP as
HTTP tunnel traffic rather than RPC tunnel traffic, including extended
C<SSPI_NTLM> authentication handling and WebSocket upgrade downgrade behavior.

=head1 AUTHOR

This module was written by Micha Lenk <micha@lenk.info>.

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright 2013 Micha Lenk <micha@lenk.info>, Astaro GmbH & Co. KG - a Sophos company.

=head1 LICENSE

This module is free software; you may redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the Apache License, Version 2.0.
You may obtain a copy of the License at http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

=cut
